# One Ocean Expedition

[1 intro paragraph]

“The students kept saying and keep saying that it was a life changing, one in a lifetime experience. A lot of it has to do with this feeling that they have accomplished something they never thought they would have accomplished. It was a combination of academic and sailing experience for the students, and they made a lot of friendships that will last for a long time.” - said Katja Susanna Enberg, Professor of fisheries science at the Department of Biological Sciences, Bergen University.

Enberg led an interdisciplinary [course on sustainability](https://www.uib.no/en/oneocean/140406/study-sustainability-pacific-ocean) for university students aboard the sailing vessel Statsraad Lehmkuhl between May and August of this year, while the ship was sailing in the Pacific-ocean. Enberg talked to extensively to Qubit about her research background, the One Ocean Expedition, and her experience teaching a course on sustainability in the Pacific.

# Raising awareness and researching sustainability

"The goal [of the One Ocean Expedition] is to raise awareness about sustainability and particularly ocean sustainability, and the role of the ocean in a sustainable future." - said Enberg. As the marine biologist explained, she got involved in the expedition, which is organized by the Statsraad Lehmkuhl Foundation, due to the University of Bergen renting out the ship for a period of four months in 2022, and deciding that there will be a course held on board.

Enberg has been studying "for quite a while the evolutionary effects of fishing, so how fishing affects, for example, life history traits of fish populations", while she has also been "working quite a lot on the practical fisheries management side as well, like quota setting, population assessments, and trying to count how many fish there are in the sea." Lately she said, she has been "trying to shift the focus even more to planetary sustainability, not just thinking about the sustainability of the fish stock, but also trying to think about the climate impact and the broader perspective as well."

Currently Enberg is taking part in a large interdisciplinary project, where as she said, they try to look into how both the biodiversity impact and carbon footprint of fishing could be reduced, while at the same time producing more food from the ocean. As she explained, besides working together on these issues with experts from NGOs, the researchers are doing different kinds of statistical analysises and modelling exercises, but also have psychologists involved in the team, who are trying to understand what kind of seafood people want to eat.

Because of this background, and her experience in teaching students for up to two weeks on research vessels in the North Sea, Enberg said that she was asked to lead the course in sustainability. She explained, that "it is quite obvious that you need to put students from different disciplines together" because that way they can "get an understanding that a lot of people actually want to work with the same goal, but they might be thinking completely differently." That's why she said that from the very beginning she wanted the course to be interdisciplinary, where students from a lot of different backgrounds are put together, with good representation from international students, not just Norwegians. In her experience, that "also enriches the learning quite a bit, when you get perspectives from someone else who is not exactly like you, and hasn't had exactly the same life."

## I wanted them to learn something bigger than whether they should recycle or not

"The students were not just students, they were also the sailing crew, because this is an old sailing ship, it doesn't work if someone is not pulling the ropes." - said Enberg. As the marine biologist explained, the students were strictly working in three shifts, 2 times for 4 hours each day, and also during the night to keep the ship functioning. This necessary focus on sailing caused some challenges for teaching, with the students only being able to spend 2 hours a day on the course, and teachers not being able to have all the students around at the same time. Enberg also added, that there was also a lack of good teaching locations on the ship, that would have been suitable for a group of all together 90 students. This is why "we ended up teaching the same thing three times, it was at times a bit exhausting."

Enberg said that when organizing the course, they also wanted to have different kind of teachers apart from her own field of biology, so teachers from climate science, psychology, law, and social anthropology. The researcher said that this way "the students would get a wider understanding of sustainability", which doesn't always "match their expectations of someone telling them how to live sustainably." 

This difference between the students expectations and what some of them got out of the course is also reflected in her final speech that she gave on board the ship, which she shared with Qubit. In it, she said that "We could also have organized a course where we would have taken the “oracle” or activist role and presented you our favorite solutions and you could have gone home with that, but we, or at least I, think that it is much more important to give you realistic view of the standing of the world and some tools to be able yourself to evaluate different solutions, maybe even start working towards new ones."

Enberg in our interview said that she wanted "them to learn something bigger, than whether they should recycle or not. Trying to open up their thoughts and minds, and also open up to see that it's not so simple, and that's part of the problem, that you have to dare to kind of confront the complexity of sustainability." In her speech Enberg also mentioned that at the start of the journey her "plans were not working" as much as she had hoped for, and she had to start adjusting her "teaching plans for the reality I met on the ship."

Despite the challenges, and one of her PhD students taking the students criticism hard, Enberg said in our interview, that "in general, I think it really went very well and they [the students] started calling me their mom on the board, so I guess I should be happy about that." For the marine biologist, some of the highlights of the journey came, when she started hearing the students using terms that, as she explained "I knew that they learned throughout this course and they kind of internalized the thinking about planetary sustainability and all kind of things that we have been talking about."

“I had chosen to structure my teaching around the SDG14, life below water sustainable development goal" - explained Enberg, because it has subgoals on fisheries, on biodiversity, and on illegal fishing, which the course could be organized around. In her teaching, Enberg covered basic marine biology, ecology, which some of the were already familiar with, who could then help their fellow students with a different background. Enberg explained that instead of lecturing, they tried to use active learning methods, where they gave the students a task to work on, and they also had debates around current issues. These ranged from questions like "should everyone become vegan?" to "is sustainability an individual responsibility or governments should also do something?"

On the first leg of the journey, from Valparaíso (Chile) to Tahiti (Society Islands, French Polynesia) Enberg and her collegues were joined by a psychology teacher, and a social anthropologists. The former used an approach that helped the students figure out solutions on how to talk to someone who is a denier of anthropogenic climate change, explained Enberg, while the latter involved storytelling and poems. The two other parts of the course were climate science, focusing on how the atmosphere and the ocean works, and law, with an introduction to the law of the sea.

## Measuring microplastics, looking for fish and whales

"When you are in a ship, when we were sailing from from Valparaíso to Tahiti it’s 5 weeks, we didn't see any island, we didn't see any ships, we didn't see anything, we just saw the sea." - said Enberg, adding that "The students started making jokes that they weren’t sure if they were actually on the sea, or in some kind of Truman show." Apart from the differences in temperature between the North Sea and the Pacific, as she explained, "the Ocean is pretty similar, wherever you go."

"We saw daily some birds, and you can maybe judge from the birds, that these are not Norwegian birds, when you are on a ship, it’s hard to say what’s the difference, obviously when we got to stop and jump in the ocean, then it was clear, because the water was 30 degrees, that never happens [in the North Sea]." An important difference between this journey and her experience in the North Sea was that "with this sailing vessel we are obviously not able to trawl or catch fish in a way that we do in the North Sea, when we are researching or teaching, so we couldn’t get this abundance of animals to look at, which we usually do. But whenever there was a fish, it was just like, oh, it was a big highlight because everyone was running around. Sometimes we saw dolphins and sharks, so that was also quite nice."

Enberg explained that in order for the ship to conduct research that is extracting material from the ocean in the economic zones of Pacific Island states, a research permission is needed, and getting that hasn't always been easy or possible for the ship.

"But where it has been possible, they are doing echosounders, of course, seeing if they are fish or whales and life in the ocean, and they are taking water samples where they can for oceanographical studies." - said Enberg, adding that samples were also regularly taken to check for microplastics, and the crew was regularly fishing, although catching a fish isn't easy in the middle of the ocean according to the researcher. She explained, that water samples are taken via a pump, and plankton samples via a small net, while researchers also measure the Secchi depth to determine how good the visibility is in the ocean.

Enberg, who isn’t involved in the data analysis process told us that the research activities are led by the Institute of Marine Research in Bergen. But the marine biologist cautioned that the Statsraad Lehmkuhls is a sailing, not a research vessel, which makes it dependent on weather. Enberg said that during their time abord the ship, the students who wanted to participate in research acitivites, could join the assistants who were doing collecting the samples and taking the measurements.

## Seeing the impacts of climate change on the Pacific Islands

"When we were able to get on some of the islands, I think that's what was a big highlight, because in the end, at sea, it is the same all the time." - said Enberg, adding that 35 students spent 3 weeks on Fiji, on some days living in local villages, and they were the ones who got the most interaction with local people. On Fiji, "they tried to understand a place where the climate effects are already quite visible. People actually have had to move their village because the ocean was destroying it" said Enberg. 

One of the challenges during the trip was due to the continuing effects of the covid pandemic. As Enberg explained, "One thing that obviously affected us a lot was COVID. If there hadn't been COVID, we would have had much more interaction with local societies, local researchers, and probably with school classes. On these islands, many of them hadn't had so much COVID, some of them just didn't want to have us at all there. If we were allowed, it was really not encouraged to have any social [interactions], that was a bit sad because when you sail to the Pacific it would be nice to interact with the people a bit more."

30 students from the region also came on board the ship, joining some of the original students, who they could have discussions with. According to Enberg, that "was also very good learning experience for the Norwegian and mostly European students that were left on board."

"I think the one of the big eye openers, even for the Norwegians who have been living from the sea for a long time. It's been a fishing nation, we've been living on oil for a long time, which also comes in from the sea in our case. But still, Norwegians really don't have that kind of closeness with the ocean as those Pacific people. They have a very specific relationship with the ocean, they kind of are the ocean, it’s sort of an extremely tight cultural and spiritual and personal relationship to the ocean, which is completely different from what we are used to." - said Enberg.

*Kapcsolódó cikkek a Qubiten:*